---
layout: post
title: The Little Schemer

date: 2010-07-05
comments: true
external-url:
categories:
---


I just finished re-reading The Little Schemer by Daniel Friedman and
Matthias Felleisen, this time working through the exercises in a Scheme
interpreter (mostly mit-scheme but occasionally I opened up the DrScheme
debugger, which was quite useful for exploring continuations and for
bouncing around in the interpreter from the final chapter). It is one of
the most delightful books I have ever read, programming related or
otherwise, so I'd be remiss not to share my thoughts here.

The tone is very light-hearted, and while the Socratic
question-and-answer style is a little strange at first, I think in the
end it works quite well. Serious programmers should not cast it aside
because it is so didactic or even because it starts out easy if you've
studied recursion even a little bit. The last three or four chapters are
what you are paying for.

The authors do not hold back here, and present such ambitious and
interesting topics as the halting problem, Church numerals, a derivation
of the Y combinator, continuations, and in the final chapter build a
simple Scheme interpreter. There is plenty here to captivate any
programmer with a little curiosity or anyone else who might be
interested in why computing is a worthy subject.

This book is part of what drove my renewed interest in Scheme, Lisp and
functional programming and really in Computer Science and programming in
general, and lead me to pick up its sequel, The Seasoned Schemer, as
well as start reading The Structure and Interpretation of Computer
Programs (more on that later). I wish I had read it earlier, but in some
ways maybe I found it at just the right moment, when I was in need of
being reinvigorated.

I owe [Douglas Crockford](http://www.crockford.com/) for finding this,
after reading the glowing
[review](http://javascript.crockford.com/little.html) on his site I was
intrigued and bought it sort of on a whim. I haven't read the third book
in the series yet, but it's definitely high on my list, as is the
authors' book on ML. I will probably re-read The Seasoned Schemer again
soon, and spend some more time gushing about it then.
